From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes.
Our weekly discussion with web
developer and technologists, Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number two 51 recorded live
Thursday, January 27th, 2011. Support for Hansel
minutes is provided by Tellerik
rad controls, the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forums and asp.net web applications
online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode, Scott
talks HTML five basics with
Mads Christiansen, Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes. And today I'm talking
about HTML five. I've got
Mads Christianson on. Thanks for
taking the time to be
here. So what are you
in charge of within Microsoft,
as it relates to HTML
five, I'm in charge of
the HTML editor in visual
studio in various places, but
it's mainly the studio visual
studio. So there's a lot
of people within Microsoft that
are working on HTML five.
I know. And like you
said, you're working on the
editor. So you're the, you're
the person who is thinking
about what the experience will
be like for a developer.
Who's going to be living
inside of visual studio. You're
going to be adding things
presumably to visual studio. I
noticed recently when I installed
the service pack, beta beta
for visual studio, under tools,
options, and validation that HTML
five now shows up as
an, as an option there.
That was a brand new
thing. And you'll find the
toolbar. Then you also have
to pop down there and
you might've seen it basically.
So what is that? What
does that dropdown box in
the editor? What does that,
what does that add or
allow me to do that
I didn't have before. So
it gives you intelligence and
validation for most of the
new HTML elements and attributes.
It's a schema and it
comes with its own set
of elements and attributes and
values. So by, by enabling
HTML five, and you have
to do this manually after
installing SP one, when you
select your schema to be
HTML five, you will get
these new elements and attributes
and it will show. So
whenever you type something, I
mean, we're going to drop
down the intelligence list and
you have your video tag
and footer and header and
all these things. So a
lot of people are using
HTML five. It feels like
to me to maybe mean
more than it really is.
I mean, it's, it's, it's
being used so often in
conversation. It seems very, very
scary. Remember that XHTML was
supposed to be the next
big thing. Certainly HTML four
is, you know, the most
successful market format ever. Everyone
right now is effectively writing
their code in HTML four
is HTML five going to
mean I'm going to have
to rewrite a lot of
stuff or is it, is
it scary? I mean, talk
to me about what is,
what is this thing that
everyone is talking about called
HTML five? Yeah. So, so
people usually talk about two
different things using the same
name, HTML five. And so
ACML five is also used
as an umbrella term for
everything. That's kind of the
web 2.0 standards. So, you
know, the HTML, CSS, web
sockets, some JavaScript API and
so on. And then there
is the HTML five, that's
only the HTML specification and
the new version of HTML,
the one that takes over.
So that's kind of the
distinction between the two. And
that's, there's a lot of
that's using statements because of
this basically. I mean, it's,
if you're used to code
and ride your market and
HTML four, then HTML five
is very simple. It's, it's
very forgiving. So, you know,
everything goes, it's not like
XHTML where there were some
things you couldn't do. XHTML
you have to close the
tags, you have to use
value quotes and so on,
and you don't have to
do that in agent of
five. So actually, if your
page is already written in
HTML, for all you need
to do is just change
the doc type. So the
new HTML five and, and
your pages are still valid,
Really. Okay. So I understand
that the doc type is
a lot simpler. Now it's
just an exclamation point, the
word doc type, and then
the word HTML, and there's
no namespace or big, long
complicated URI in, in the,
at the top of my
document. Yeah, that's right. And
actually, if you're, if you're
using the other flavor of
HTML five, the XHTML five,
then you actually don't even
need a doc type Really.
So I would just start
it with HTML as a,
as a root element. And
that's X HTML five. Yeah.
So yeah, if you don't
have a duck type, then,
then it's like, Hmm, well,
of course you have to
adhere to the XML rules
of value quotes and close
your tax and so on.
Okay. So I can take
my existing HTML four. I
can put doc type HTML
on it. And then presumably
browsers might change their renderers,
like Firefox, or I might
start treating it like HTML
five. I assume I might
have some small changes in
the way things render between
four and five, just because
I changed my doc type.
Cause I'm making a declaration
that this is HTML five.
Yes, yes. There are. I
mean, so the, I use
as a rule of thumb
that if it worked in,
in  or it worked
in HTML four and it
just changed the doc type
chances are that it works
and they smell five pretty,
pretty big. Okay. And I
understand that there's a bunch
of new semantic links, a
mathematic elements rather, excuse me,
like article header, footer nav,
is that meant to like
keep people from using dibs
for everything. Yeah. Basically it,
it helps you break up
your page in a more
semantical way and they're awesome
discussions going on right now
within the working groups and
online on when to use
the new tech section for
instance, and when to use
a diff, because is most
people would probably use this
as some sort of section
the limiter or container. So,
so there is no clear
understanding on when to use
what. So I think we
have to just wait and
see what the W3C comes
up with and recommend us
to do, but, but it
seems that you can do
pretty much whatever you want
and no matter what, if
you use the footer and
header and age groups and
all these new somatic markups,
it will, it will result
in a more semantic document.
Even though that, you know,
the recommendations might change a
little bit in the future.
It is still better than
it was before in my
mind. But these, these new
elements in a, in a
browser that doesn't understand them
will just be ignored. Right.
So if I say article
or footer, even I six,
we'll just say, I don't
know what that is and
it'll ignore it. Just like
any stray element, right? Yeah,
exactly. So, so basically what,
what you have to do
for, I use six, seven,
and eight is to include
a little piece of JavaScript
that creates those elements. And
once you do that, they
just become elements like any
other element that you can,
you can use them. So
what most people do is
that they have this conditional.
So I was going to
include, you know, if less
than  a thing in
your, then include this script
tech, which then Register, And
then probably you also have
in your CSS, you want
to make sure that they
are perceived as block elements
and that's used for styling.
So the styling is equal
in. Oh, okay. If you
go take a look in
the, in the reset CSS,
you know, the reset CSS
file is done by Yahoo
and, and other entities out
there it's been used for
many years. You'll see them
coming out right now with
support for these new elements.
Let's basically what you want
to do. You, you just
want to lay the ground
for the old process. And
then, So it doesn't necessarily
make the browser HTML five
compliant in all features, but
it'll definitely make it recognize
some of these new elements
as being something that stylish,
right? Yeah. So it looked
exactly the same and I
old versus new with this,
with these JavaScript things. And
it's big, it's a very
small JavaScript. It basically just
says document, create element video.
That's basically all you have
to do. And then the
browser will start recognizing it
as a, as a real
tech is a real element.
I see. I see. So
some of these tags are
semantic and for breaking up
sections like article and header
and footer, and then some
of these are a little
bit more interesting, like, like
progress for like some kind
of a progress bar or
video or canvas. It seems
like a lot of, a
lot of discussion. And a
lot of controversy happens around
some of these, these more
active tags and like video,
for example, I'm hearing lots
of people saying that the
video tag is a good
idea in theory, but underneath
it, you don't really know
if your browser supports particular
codec or will be able
to play a video until
you actually give it a
try and see if it
works. Yeah. Well, and you
can actually enjoy him. You
can ask whether or not
the certain video code, I
guess, support it. So you
don't have to try, but
you can, you can, in
JavaScript, you can ask whether
or not certain formats are
supported before starting playing anything.
When asked with JavaScript, if
they are, if a certain
Kodak is supported, they'll say
probably, or maybe for example,
that, you know, saying that
a dot ABI or dot
MP4 is supported, the prouder
can say, well, maybe, but
I don't necessarily know until
I see what's inside it
because some of these video
files are containers. And you
can't tell just by presenting
the, the extension about whether
or not a file will
be readable. Exactly. So some
of these containers put, contain,
so they have a video
and they have an audio
part and the video could
be in one format and
the audio could be in
another file, But the container
And the file extension of
that file is the same.
So no one listed it,
you know, it looks inside
of it. But HTML five
actually does have a, for
you to specify what's inside
so that you can get
rid of the maybes and
probably in all that and
just get a yes or
no. Okay. So the more,
the more clear you are
and the more you give
it, the, the browser information
about exactly what's going on
inside specifically indicating the Kodak
that you're going to use,
then you'll be able to
get, get real answers as
to whether or not video
is going to work. Okay.
And I noticed also that
the input element has a
whole lot of new stuff.
Cause right now there's basically
input, text and input drop
down and things like that.
But now we're going to
have input element does with
types like email and date
and date, date, time, and
month and week are those
things that I can do
now in visual studio. Like
what if I make an
input box that's of type
email, what will work and
what won't today? Yeah. So
what we've done with, with
the new HTML five schema
support and SP one is
that we've taken the old
elements such as input and
update the value lists. So
you will get full entails
and support for, for email
URL date and all these
other types of all these
other values you can use
in your type field. So
that is fully supported, but
of course, it's, it's then
up to the browsers to
actually support these things. And
as of right now, with
this particular one, it's a
bit limited. It seems that
a lot of these new
mechanisms we see in the,
in the forms, in the
HTML forms, hasn't been as
widely adopted by the browser
vendors yet, but that will
probably come very soon. Hi,
this is Scott coming to
you from another place in
time. Are you using agile
practices to manage your software
development? There's lots of tools
in the market that manage
the steps of a project,
but most of them focus
on individual roles, get ready
for a solution that caters
for the success of the
whole team. Guys at Tellerik
introduced team pulse to an
agile project management tool. That'll
help you gather ideas, estimate
plan, track progress in a
common workspace. Finally, companies, regardless
of their size can use
a lightweight and convenient tool
that makes all the stakeholders
work as a United team.
Even if they're in different
countries by combining intuitive user
interface and the power of
server light team poles removes
the roadblocks that you typically
face and applying agile in
an effective manner, no more
lost data, no disparate systems,
no lack of critical analytics
regarding the health and philosophy
project. So if yourself get
a free copy for five
users on one project at
tellerik.com/team pulse, and please do
thank tolerant for supporting Hansel
minutes on their Facebook fan
page, facebook.com/t L E R
I K Keller. We do
appreciate it. There wouldn't be
a Hansel minutes. If there
wasn't, Tellerik helping us. That
is interesting that there's all
these new things in HTML,
but it doesn't seem like
everyone is supporting all the
different, all the different features.
I mean, a lot of
attention is, is spent talking
about video and I don't
hear a lot about things
like input type equals color.
I don't even think I've
seen them. I mean, I
run all the latest browsers.
I run the latest everything,
and I don't, I don't
bump into those very often
out there in the world.
No, I don't. I don't,
I don't actually think that
there's a single browser supporting
the color value opera has
the most support for these
new types. So if you
choose date, for instance, it
will pop up a date
picker and a calendar. Then
you can customize. So you
can do want it to
show weeks months, should you
navigate, how do you navigate
it? You can style it.
And all these things. So
opera, they have support Foleys,
pretty cool features. And it
seems that the other browsers
are catching up slowly. I
mean, it'll, it'll probably take
some time to get everything
supported. So these are, these
are markup things that are
available to me in HTML
five, but I understand that
there's also some kind of
services, I guess, is the
best way to phrase it.
Things like geolocation and local
storage. I mean, these aren't
parts of markup. He's our,
is your basically JavaScript API
that I can access in
September. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. So,
so, so when, when he's
talking about HTML five, some
people, they tend to see
that the umbrella term also
covering these related technologies such
as the new JavaScript API,
which is, you know, geolocation,
web sockets and so on.
But yeah, they actually allow
you to control a lot
more than before. So they're
good for geolocation, as you
can ask the use of
where are, you know, really
it has really great potential
fulfilling cool apps, but there
are other stuff like web
sockets. Finally, we can get
to the realtime web that
we've always wanted and has
been a real pain before
to do because of the
web is, you know, this,
I request and you respond,
but I have to do
the request first before I
get any answers. So it's
always been a little bit
awkward to have real time,
but now we can with
WebSockets now we're just, we
just need all the browsers
again. And we need all
the underlying service technologies to
pick up this new technology.
It seems like all of
the, all these different HTML
five features have an associated
JavaScript library. Like modernizer is
one of them that I,
that comes to mind. That
is a way of saying
use it if you support
it natively, otherwise, try this
or try this, or try
this before, completely giving up.
For example, with geolocation, it's
a JavaScript thing that all
these browsers just should support
and Firefox supports it in
Chrome. And so I can
say, get current position with
JavaScript on a geolocation object
and then, you know, start
getting information about where I'm
at, whether that be very
vague, like a city or
state, or very specific, like
an exact Latin lawn, but
I can use like modernizer,
which is a little JavaScript
library, browser supports this feature.
Otherwise maybe try a plugin
or something else. Is that
the best practice to be
saying, do I support this
feature as opposed to be
saying, do I support HTML
five? Oh yeah. You always
want to, you always want
to ask for this specific
feature because the browsers are,
you know, their, their, their
progress in supporting all, this
is pretty independent of each
other. So you see somebody
else's have support for one
thing, but not the other
and vice versa with the
other browsers. So always asks
for a specific feature, whether
or not that support it
has that always been the
way to do things the
right way to do things.
But I remember writing a
lot of code in the,
in the late nineties and
the early two thousands that
was saying that was a
bad idea. That was a
real bad idea quicker than
a website might not change
that much. So always ask
for the feature, if the
browser support certain feature, instead
of asking, for instance, the
browser version, whatever API. So
theoretically, and in a, in
an ideal world, all of
this are asking if it's
a specific version of Firefox
should, should go away. It
should not be doing, does
this mean though that I
can use features of HTML
five without necessarily using all
of what I need to
go and start using all
these different elements? If I
just wanted my existing website?
Or can I ask, you
can just ask for that
one feature, one feature that
comes in the geolocation that
comes in HTML five, it
will work even though your
vendors, regardless of what type
of a website you're building.
So you can actually start
using all of these new
API right now without changing
your markup. See that, that,
that definitely changes that that
can confuse things, because I
think so many people out
there are saying, you know,
when can I use HTML
five and should I start
using it today? But, you
know, they might just want
to look in and say,
I just want to use
geolocation. I just want to
use a local storage. They
could start doing this today
in their applications. And they
can, as I said, that
there's JavaScript libraries to kind
of help them through this
with even older browsers. So,
I mean, isn't that confusing?
I mean, so many people
are sitting around waiting for
new browsers and waiting for
things to settle down. They
really could be doing this
today. It's very confusing, but
I think it ties down
to this. It's a duality
of, of HTML five that
it's, it's a markup language,
but then it's, it's an
umbrella term that covers all
this different things. So it's
because it's used in those
two ways that I think
it adds to the, One
of the other things that's
interesting. Five is a specification
that's called web storage or
what sometimes people called HTML
five storage. So this is
basically local story. That's like
not a cookie, right? It's,
it's, it's literally, you have
a little bit of space
on the user's desk that
you can put stuff in
And you can already, you
can already leverage this today.
I think all the way
back to  maybe before
that as well, but then
you need one of those
JavaScript libraries you're talking about
that, that wraps, that wraps
all of this functionality, because
you've been able to do
this in various different ways
in the old I E
five and six days, you
could attach it. Okay. Which
is a very different way
of doing it, the HTML
five way, but between the
HTML five and the old
thing, there's been a
lot of different implementations across
the different browsers. So with
the right library out there,
you can actually start using
that already. I assume that
it's not encrypted or anything
like that, but I can
basically, it's basically a hash
table that I can put
stuff in and I can
count on it being, being
there when I get back
now, is this just literally
a hash table that source
itself on disc? Or can
I do, like, is this
a little tiny database? And
I can do some, some,
some SQL on it, There
are different versions. And the,
the one that you can
use right now across the
board is, is the hashtag.
I see. Okay. Yup. And
then we have the index
DB thing. That's, that's, isn't
really supported yet by any,
any browser it's being slowly
adopted though. So, so it
will be in, and you
can do some more funky
stuff using that. Right. Right.
I know that Firefox 90,
you don't quite have support
for that yet. Yeah. Interesting.
Interesting. I remember that there
were a lot of hacks
back in the day before
HTML five, there were a
lot of local storage hacks.
People shoving things in cookies
and hiding things in the
browser history and, you know,
and anything that they could
do to store, to store
state, probably not a place
for a bank to store
information about your, your accounts,
but definitely a better place
to store information is the
user's machine than in a
database on the server side.
If it's not private private
data. Exactly. It, it opens
up a lot of possibilities
for offline web. Yeah. Actually,
and that's interesting question. I
know that I run, I
run Chrome sometimes and I
use offline, offline email. Where
is it getting its HTML
from? I mean, is it
pulling out of the cash?
I mean, how can I
visit a page when I
don't even, I was on
an airplane and I was
checking my email, how do
I, how am I doing
that? I think your Chrome
is using, that's using Google
gears, right. Is that where
the HTML is coming from?
And an offline thing? I
mean, is the idea of
an offline app and HTML
five thing, or is that
is the concept of an
offline application is something that
people have kind of devised
or derived from all of
these other, these other new
specifications and features. I'm actually
not quite sure where, where
it originated Google gears, I
think was the first full
fledged solution for this problem,
but it was limited. And
now Google gears is it's
going away and it's that
HTML five is taken over.
I mean, that's what Google
says. So they're gonna remove
their old implementation for the
new one. So I just
think it's one of those
things that start out as
a proprietary thing and slowly
gained, gained ground and, and
then made it into the
standard space specifications, like most
other things, Right. It's interesting.
If you, if you look
at the history of this,
almost all of these features
were available via plugins or
via hacks or via JavaScript
libraries. And then it slowly
becomes something that is built
in, which is kind of
cool. Yeah. I don't usually
think of the standards bodies
as paying attention, but somehow
they did it in this
instance. Yeah. Well, in this
instance, the browser vendors kind
of took over and drove
the whole creation of the
HTML five SMAs patients. So
I guess that's why it
happens so fast. Usually it
takes a long time. There's
a long stabilization period for
any standard before it gets
widely adoption here. It seems
that all the browsers are
jumping on the bandwagon and
want to support HTML five.
Whereas there have been literally
no stabilization period of the
specification yet. Yeah. Yeah. That's
true. Is it? It's not
done yet? Is it? No,
no, no, no. It's, it's
done in 2022. I think
that's the, if it's the
official, I don't know where
I have stayed from. You
could find it out there.
So, so the idea of
waiting is, is a silly
one. We really should just
start doing this now. I
mean, there's no reason to
wait for anything with HTML
five, right? No. Yeah. Just
start using it. Interesting. I'm
looking online here and apparently
the way that you do
offline applications is you have
a manifest file. So you
say on your route, you
see HTML and you say,
here's my manifest, which is
a list of all of
the things that your website
is going to need offline.
So it's basically a, a
cash manifest that says if,
if I'm offline, go and
use this, and if I'm
offline, I'm going to need
this CSS and these images
and all this stuff. So
it's, it's seems very straightforward.
Just a matter of sitting
down and doing it. Yeah.
It seems very easy. It's
it's like almost building an
application, but without, without an
installer. Yeah, really. I guess
it is. I mean, once
you have a link on
your desktop, people are no
longer going to be able
to tell whether or not
something is an app that
they install or an app
that they run on their
browser. I mean, I know
that my wife has kind
of stopped making the distinction,
but things like Gmail or
mint.com, she doesn't think of
them as a place anymore.
She does think of them
as applications. Yeah. And it
isn't, the condition was a
web application. I use, if
you ever used the jump
lists and the, the new
feature where you can drag
your tap down to your
task bar in windows seven
with . Yeah. Yeah. I
actually, I used that on
with Facebook. That's the one
I always use the most.
I've drugged Facebook down into
the task bar. So I
have a little Facebook icon.
I right. Click on it
and then I'll click on
news and it'll take me
right to that location. So
it's almost like tiny bookmarks
within a, within an existing
icon, but it also has
a little, I like, I
just clicked on it right
now and it says I
have to mail messages. So
there's a little overlay over
the, in mind. Yeah. And
you can do, you can
do this before. I, I
nine and windows seven, there
was the, the prism initiative
from Mozilla that enabled that
for Firefox. So, so you've
been doing this for a
long time and this probably
makes it into the standards
someday as well. But it
does emphasize that a lot
of what we consider to
be websites, actually our applications.
And we can now start
using them as such Really.
There's a thing that turns
us on for Firefox. No,
not in the windows seven
task bar, but there's, if
you, if you go search
for prism Oh, right. Yeah.
Those are called single-site browsers
or SSPs. These are, this
is a way of formally
saying this is an applicant.
This isn't a web application.
And then you remove things
like toolbars. And then it
really looks like an app
as opposed to a bookmark.
Definitely. Now, can I write
these things now with asp.net?
I know that I was
at web camps recently, and
that question keeps coming up
and I've been telling people
that, you know, if you
want to use web Forms
or asp.net MVC, you could
definitely start writing HTML five.
Now, you know, there might
be a few quirks, but
for the most part, there's
no reason to wait. What,
what is your matrix in
the sense that it doesn't
break down? So this is,
I can do this before
I get the service pack
one, or do I want
to upgrade? Do I want
to get the beta beta?
So the beta will make
it a lot easier for
me to do this. And
I presume that the beta
isn't the, isn't the end,
all of HTML five that
we're going to keep doing
and keep, keep improving. So
I assume that we'll keep
seeing more HTML, five support
going forward in Microsoft products.
The service pack one comes
out in the spring. That's
not the end of it.
We're going to keep creating
more HTML, five things. That's
cool. Well, thank you very
much for clearing it up
a little bit. I really
appreciate that. Alright, well, folks
can go take a look@diveintohtmlfive.org,
as well as a bunch
of other great HTML, five
websites that I'm going to
put in the show notes.
This has been another episode
of Hansel minutes. We'll see
you again next week.